# SNP_Utils

SNP\_Utils is a Python program that creates a VCF file for a list of SNPs given in an Illumina lookup table. There are three subroutines for SNP\_Utils: `CONFIG`, `BLAST`, and `SAM`

To get basic usage information, simply run the program without any arguments

```
$ ./snp_utils.py
usage: snp_utils.py [-h] {CONFIG,BLAST,SAM} ...

optional arguments:
  -h, --help          show this help message and exit

Subroutine:
  Choose a subroutine

  {CONFIG,BLAST,SAM}  'BLAST' means we are running a BLAST search to find
                      SNPs, 'SAM' means we are using a SAM file, 'CONFIG' is
                      used to configure a BLAST search
```

More detailed information can be found for each subroutine by passing the name of the subroutine and the `-h | --help` flag or by reading below

## Illumina Lookup Table

The Illumina lookup table is a two-column, headerless table that has a SNP ID and contextual sequence in with the SNP in brackets (`[A/B]`) shwogin the two states for the SNP (`A` and `B`). The two columns are *tab*-delimited.

Example

```
SNP_1   ACGTCACGATCGA[A/G]ACGTATGCGAAGTTCGCC
SNP_2   GCTAGACTACCAG[G/T]GTCACGATGCCGTCAGTC
```

## `CONFIG`

The `CONFIG` subroutine is used only when running BLAST within SNP\_Utils. This step is **required** before running BLAST, but not required before parsing a BLAST XML file. Options for `CONFIG` are as follows:

 - Choosing whether the reference is in FASTA or nucleotide BLAST database format and specifying the path to these files
 - E-value threshold
 - Maximum number of hits and hsps
 - Percent identity to keep
 - Whether or not to keep the FASTA file generated from the Illumina lookup table

The configuration file is written in [INI format](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/INI_file)

## `BLAST`

The `BLAST` subroutine is used to run and parse BLAST results to create a VCF file of SNPs from an Illumina lookup table. To run BLASTn within SNP\_Utils, you must configure using the `CONFIG` subroutine. `BLAST` can also rank SNPs; high-ranking SNPs are those that had a low e-value and high bit-score in BLAST. When ranking, only the highest hit for every SNP is kept, ties for highest include both SNPs. To parse a previously-generated BLAST XML file, you do not need to configure BLAST. Options for `BLAST` are as follows:

 - Choosing either a BLAST config or XML file as input
 - Setting the basename for the output
 - Choosing whether or not we rank SNPs
 - Setting filtering schemes to eliminate duplicate SNPs

## `SAM`

The `SAM` subroutine is used to parse a SAM file designed around the Illumina lookup table. This SAM file should be generated by read-mapping the Illumina lookup sequences to a reference genome. Options for `SAM` are as follows:

 - Choosing the SAM file and reference genome in FASTA format
 - Setting the basename for the output
 - Setting filtering schemes to eliminate duplicate SNPs

## Filtering Final VCF

SNP\_Utils can filter found SNPs in an attempt to remove duplicate positions. Filtering works with both `BLAST` and `SAM` subroutines. The following filtering schemes are available:
 - Use a genetic map to keeps SNPs on the chromosome specified by the map. Use `-b | --by-chrom` and `-m | --genetic-map` to filter by chromosome
 - Set a minimum distance threshold in base pairs and keep the leftmost SNP when two are closer than this threshold. Use `-t | --threshold` to specify this distance in base pairs
 - Use genetic map distances to choose the SNP closest to this position proportionally. This option ignores SNPs on other chromosomes. Please note that if using the `BLAST` subroutine, this filtering scheme requires that a reference sequence be used instead of a BLAST database or that the BLAST database was generated with the `-parse_seqids` flag toggled. Use `-d | --by-distance` and `-m | --genetic-map` to filter by genetic map distance

## Outputs

SNP\_Utils creates between one and six output files

| File name | Contents |
| --------- | -------- |
| *config*.ini | BLAST configuration file generated from `CONFIG` |
| *fasta*_*database*.xml | XML results from running BLAST with SNP\_Utils, generated from `BLAST` |
| *lookup*.fasta | Lookup table in FASTA format for running BLAST with SNP\_Utils, generated from `BLAST` and `CONFIG` with `-k | --keep-query`
| *output*.vcf | VCF file with confident SNP positions, generated from `BLAST` and `SAM` |
| *output*_masked.vcf | VCF file with masked ('N') alternate states for each SNP, these are SNPs that we could not find a position for given the Illumina lookup table, generated from `BLAST` and `SAM` if there were masked SNPs |
| *output*_failed.log | List of SNP IDs that we could not find at all, generated from `BLAST` and `SNP` if there were failures|

## Dependencies
SNP\_Utils depends on the following:
 - [Python 3](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
 - [NCBI BLASTn](http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi)
 - [BioPython](http://biopython.org/wiki/Biopython)
 - [BeautifulSoup 4](https://www.crummy.com/software/BeautifulSoup/)
 - [Overload](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/overload)
 - [lxml](http://lxml.de/)

The last four all available on [PyPi](https://pypi.python.org/pypi) and can be downloaded using [pip3](https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/installing/) (included with Python 3.4 or greater)
